---
series: 'Building an Interpreter for Propositional Logic'
title: 'Handling variables'
date: 2019-01-26
tags:
  - code
  - ruby
  - interpreter
  - philosophy
  - epistemology
  - logic
  - tutorial
  - interpreter
summary: The third in a series of posts laying out the process, step by step, of building an interpreter in Ruby for working with propositional logic. In this post, we expand the interpreter to work with variable expressions in classical propositional logic, like <code>~p & q</code>. Since we are dealing with variable expressions and not fixed expressions (like <code>~T & F</code>), we need to be able to output full truth tables, and not simply resolve the final boolean output.
---

When we left our interpreter for propositional logic, we had an executable test script with `minitest/autorun` that executed a full test suite of our functionality, which is the full set of valid expressions in classical propositional logic:

- stacked negation operators (e.g. `~~T`),
- parentheses to group sub-expressions (e.g. `~(T v F) & T`),
- multiple binary operators used in one expression (e.g. `T & F v T`), and
- the proper operator precedence of the logical operators

> You can find the script we have built to this point in [this revision of this Gist](https://gist.github.com/fractaledmind/a072674b18086fdebf3b3a535c0f7dfb/338dce03451956f6b9c0bfab80ee992317fc0d0b).

In this post, we are going to extend that interpreter to handle variables, which means allowing us to produce truth tables for all of the possible outcomes as well as providing a boolean for a specific set of values for the variables. With this functionality in place, we will have what I consider a feature-complete interpreter for propositional logic.

So, let's dig into it...

- - -

The first thing we need to do is update our `Lexer` to parse variables. Since we are using uppercase `T` and `F` for our boolean tokens, I think it makes sense to use lowercase (single) letters for variables. Moreover, to avoid possible confusion, let's disallow `t`, `f`, and `v` as variables since `t` and `f` correspond to our uppercase boolean tokens and `v` is our disjunction operator. This is minimalistic, allowing only single letter variables, but it helps us to focus on the essential details of the implementation, and it also aligns with the standard syntax used by philosophers.

We can extend our `Lexer` by adding a new condition to our `case`-statement:

```ruby
case char
# ...
when *(('a'..'z').to_a - ['t', 'f', 'v'])
  Token.new(:VAR, char)
end
```

As you can see, all we do is splat an array of lowercase letters (minus `t`, `f`, and `v`). When we get a match, we create a new `:VAR` type `Token`.

With a new `Token` type, we now need to create a new `AST` class as well so that our `Parser` can correctly handle these new tokens.

```ruby
module AST
  class Variable
    attr_reader :value

    def initialize(value)
      @value = value
    end
  end
end
```

This is a simple class that actually mirrors our `AST::Atom` class. We simply have an object with a value. We want to ensure that the syntax tree classes are distinct, though, as we will need to interpret them different. An `Atom` is a fixed boolean value, while a `Variable` is, well, a variable boolean value. Ensuring that our abstract syntax tree generated by the `Parser` correctly encodes the difference between these two objects is necessary to allow us to then extend the interpreter.

So, now that we have a new `Token` type and a new `AST` class, let's consider what we need to update in our `Parser` to correctly build our syntax tree.

- - -

As a quick refresher, a parser encodes a _grammar_ and outputs an _abstract syntax tree_. Our current grammar rules are:

~~~
expression :: disjunction (IFSO expression)*
disjunction :: conjunction (OR disjunction)*
conjunction :: formula (AND conjunction)*
formula :: (NOT)* formula | LPAREN expression RPAREN | term
term :: TRUE | FALSE
~~~

Each grammar rule corresponds to a method in our `Parser` class. In order to support variables, we need to update our grammar and the corresponding parsing method.

A variable is akin to an atom, and thus can simply be the third option for our `term` rule:

~~~
term :: TRUE | FALSE | VAR
~~~

In order to allow for our `Parser#term` method to handle `:VAR` `Token` types, we simply need to add another `elsif` block:

```ruby
# ...
elsif token.type == :VAR
  eat(:VAR)
  return AST::Variable.new(token.value)
# ...
```

To this point, things have been simple. Our `Lexer` and `Parser` know how to handle variables. When we parse a string like <code>~p & q</code>, we will get a correct abstract syntax tree. The real complexity comes in the `Interpreter`. Up to this point, our interpreter was rather simple as it only ever worked with fixed values. Now, we need the interpreter to handle variable values. This means that we can't simply compute the boolean output of the logical expression; instead, we need to allow context to be passed in to resolve the variables.

- - -

Our `Interpreter` works using the "visitor pattern". We define methods to visit each kind of AST node that the `Parser` can produce. So, we need to add a new `visit_variable` method. This method can be similar to the `visit_atom` method, except that the `node.value` won't be a boolean value but rather the variable name. In order to map from a variable name to a boolean value, we will need the `Interpreter` to allow for a hash of variable names to boolean values to be passed in as well.

This means we can extend the initializer to accept an optional `context` hash, which we can store in an instance variable so that it is available in our new `visit_variable` method:

```ruby
class Interpreter
  def initialize(ast, context = {})
    @ast = ast
    @context = context
  end

  # ...

  def visit_variable(node)
    @context[node.value]
  end
end
```

Let's put this into action. Our `interpret` method was defined as so:

```ruby
def interpret(string)
  tokens = Lexer.new(string).tokens
  ast = Parser.new(tokens).parse
  Interpreter.new(ast).interpret
end
```

Let's extend this as well to accept an optional `context` argument and pass that to `Interpreter.new`:

```ruby
def interpret(string, context = {})
  tokens = Lexer.new(string).tokens
  ast = Parser.new(tokens).parse
  Interpreter.new(ast, context).interpret
end
```

This will allow us to now perform:

```ruby
interpret('~p & q', 'p' => true, 'q' => false)
# => false
```

Unfortunately, this won't work with symbol keys in our hash, which is the terser and simpler hash format:

```ruby
interpret('~p & q', p: true, q: false)
# => nil
```

Fortunately, though, this is a quick and simple fix. In our `Interpreter#initialize` method, we can simply stringify the context keys:

```ruby
class Interpreter
  def initialize(ast, context = {})
    @ast = ast
    @context = context.transform_keys(&:to_s)
  end
end
```

Now, the terse hash syntax works:

```ruby
interpret('~p & q', p: true, q: false)
# => false
```

I'm happy with this. We can successfully and correctly interpret logical expressions that use variables by passing in a context hash. The only other feature that I want to implement is to build a truth table that outputs the full set of possibilities.

- - -

Let's consider what the truth table looks like for <code>~p & q</code>:

<table class="truth-table">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th><code>p</code></th>
      <th><code>q</code></th>
      <th><code>~p</code></th>
      <th><code>~p & q</code></th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>¯
    <tr>
      <th>T</th>
      <th>T</th>
      <td>F</td>
      <td>F</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>T</th>
      <th>F</th>
      <td>F</td>
      <td>F</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>F</th>
      <th>T</th>
      <td>T</td>
      <td>T</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>F</th>
      <th>F</th>
      <td>T</td>
      <td>F</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

The key details here are:

1. the enumeration of all possible combinations of states for the variables, and
2. a breakdown of the boolean output at each stage of the computation.

We need to find a way to encode this in Ruby.

The simplest way to encode a set of possibilities is with a `Hash`. We can use the context hashes as the top-level keys for a hash of possibilities and then provide values as a hash of stage outputs. To take our <code>~p & q</code> example, we could construct a hash like so:

```ruby
{{ '{{' }}"p"=>true, "q"=>true}=>{"~p"=>false, "~p & q"=>false},
 {"p"=>true, "q"=>false}=>{"~p"=>false, "~p & q"=>false},
 {"p"=>false, "q"=>true}=>{"~p"=>true, "~p & q"=>true},
 {"p"=>false, "q"=>false}=>{"~p"=>true, "~p & q"=>false}}
```

This provides us the same information as the HTML table; we have all possible combinations of variable states as well as the breakdowns of the boolean outputs at each stage of the computation.

The task now is simply to make it possible to generate such a hash.

Let's start by building a hash of all of the possible combinations of variable states. What we need is Ruby code that will generate every permutation of `true` and `false` for the total number of variables. Luckily for us, Ruby provides convenience methods for working with combinations and permutations. We get 4 methods:

* [`Array#combination`](https://ruby-doc.org/3.2.2/Array.html#method-i-combination)
* [`Array#permutation`](https://ruby-doc.org/3.2.2/Array.html#method-i-permutation)
* [`Array#repeated_combination`](https://ruby-doc.org/3.2.2/Array.html#method-i-repeated_combination)
* [`Array#repeated_permutation`](https://ruby-doc.org/3.2.2/Array.html#method-i-repeated_permutation)

Combinations are for situations where the order of the output _doesn't_ matter, while permutations are for when order _does_ matter. The `repeated_*` variants are for situations when we want duplicates. The differences might be clearer with some examples. Let's consider the output of each method when working with an array of boolean values (`[true, false]`) and wanting an array of tuples:

```ruby
> [true, false].combination(2).to_a
=> [[true, false]]
> [true, false].permutation(2).to_a
=> [[true, false], [false, true]]
> [true, false].repeated_combination(2).to_a
=> [[true, true], [true, false], [false, false]]
> [true, false].repeated_permutation(2).to_a
=> [[true, true], [true, false], [false, true], [false, false]]
```

When order doesn't matter and duplicates aren't allowed (`Array#combination`), our array of two values will only output an array of one tuple. This is because `[true, false]` and `[false, true]` are only distinct in that their order. If order doesn't matter, the output won't distinguish between these two tuples. When order does matter but duplicates still aren't allowed (`Array#permutation`), we will get these two distinct tuples. When order doesn't matter but duplicates are allowed (`Array#repeated_combination`), we get our original tuple as well as the two value duplicates. Finally, when order does matter but duplicates are allowed (`Array#repeated_permutation`), we get the largest array of tuples.

In our case, we can see that we need `Array#repeated_permutation`. We simply take the array of boolean values and produce an array of arrays for however many variables we have in our expression.

So, let's start writing some code to build this out. I think that it makes the most sense to build an `Expression` class to hold this functionality. This will isolate this functionality from the specific functionality of the `Interpreter`. It also provides a foundation for additional features related to dealing with a logic expression string. We start with a simple initializer:

```ruby
class Expression
  def initialize(string)
    @string = string
  end
end
```

This allows us to create expression instances for valid logic expression strings, like `Expression.new('~p & q')`.

Next, let's run the `Lexer` and `Parser` to generate an array of `Token`s and an AST, respectively:

```ruby
class Expression
  # ...

  def tokens = Lexer.new(@string).tokens
  def ast = Parser.new(tokens).parse
end
```

For convenience with fixed value expressions, let's add a `resolve` method that runs the `Interpreter`:

```ruby
class Expression
  # ...

  def resolve
    interpreter = Interpreter.new(ast)
    interpreter.interpret
  end
end
```

This can replace our `interpret` method from previous iterations. So, for example, we can update our tests:

```ruby
def test_tokens
  assert_equal true, Expression.new('T').resolve
  assert_equal false, Expression.new('F').resolve
end
```

For expressions with variables, we can add a `given` method that takes a context hash:

```ruby
class Expression
  # ...

  def given(context)
    interpreter = Interpreter.new(ast, context)
    interpreter.interpret
  end
end
```

This would allow us to add tests for variable expressions:

```ruby
def test_simple_variable_expressions
  assert_equal false, Expression.new('~p & q').given(p: false, q: false)
  assert_equal false, Expression.new('p v ~q').given(p: false, q: true)
end
```

With all of this setup, we can finally turn back to creating a `truth_table` method. As discussed earlier, we want to use `Array#repeated_permutation` to get a full set of combinations of boolean values for the number of variables in the expression, and then we will build a hash where each combination is one key/value pair:

```ruby
class Expression
  # ...

  def truth_table
    table = {}
    [true, false].repeated_permutation(variables.count).each do |booleans|
      context = Hash[variables.zip(booleans)]
      table[context] = given(context)
    end
    table
  end

  def variables = tokens.select { |t| t.type == :VAR }.map(&:value)
end
```

Here we get the number of variables simply by selecting the `:VAR` type tokens and counting them. This we can pass into `Array#repeated_permutation` to get our array of arrays. We iterate over this array to work with each array of boolean values. We can go from an array of boolean values (e.g. `[true, false, true]`) to a hash of variables and booleans (e.g. `{p: true, q: false, r: true}`) using `Hash#zip`. With a context hash prepared, we can simply call our `when` method to get the result and provide that as the value to our key/value pair.

In full, this is what our `Expression` class looks like now:

```ruby
class Expression
  def initialize(string)
    @string = string
  end

  def resolve
    interpreter = Interpreter.new(ast)
    interpreter.interpret
  end

  def given(context)
    interpreter = Interpreter.new(ast, context)
    interpreter.interpret
  end

  def truth_table
    table = {}
    [true, false].repeated_permutation(variables.count).each do |booleans|
      context = Hash[variables.zip(booleans)]
      table[context] = given(context)
    end
    table
  end

  def variables = tokens.select { |t| t.type == :VAR }.map(&:value)
  def tokens = Lexer.new(@string).tokens
  def ast = Parser.new(tokens).parse
end
```

Our new `Expression#truth_table` method implements the first of the two features we want—it enumerates all possible combinations of states for the variables. So, if we call:

```ruby
Expression.new('~p & q').truth_table
```

we will get back:

```ruby
{{ '{{' }}"p"=>true, "q"=>true}=>false,
 {"p"=>true, "q"=>false}=>false,
 {"p"=>false, "q"=>true}=>true,
 {"p"=>false, "q"=>false}=>false}
```

This is lovely. The only thing left is to ensure that our `Expression#truth_table` function provides a value for each state that is a breakdown of the boolean output at each stage of the computation; that is, instead of the hash above with final boolean outputs, we want a hash like so:

```ruby
{{ '{{' }}"p"=>true, "q"=>true}=>{"~p"=>false, "~p & q"=>false},
 {"p"=>true, "q"=>false}=>{"~p"=>false, "~p & q"=>false},
 {"p"=>false, "q"=>true}=>{"~p"=>true, "~p & q"=>true},
 {"p"=>false, "q"=>false}=>{"~p"=>true, "~p & q"=>false}}
```

However, I am noticing the size of this post, and I think we should make this a separate post in this series, as the code changes for this one feature are somewhat extensive. So, let's leave things here with that teaser.

> You can find the script we have built to this point in [this revision of this Gist](https://gist.github.com/fractaledmind/a072674b18086fdebf3b3a535c0f7dfb/98fe7aea8e6432bb9ac10368156237ecf0a2ac44). Check out the full script to see the full set of test cases that we added for testing our new `Expression#truth_table` function.

- - -

## All posts in this series

* [Part 1 — starting simple]({% link _posts/2017-12-29-ruby-logic-interpreter-1.md %})
* [Part 2 — proper propositional logic]({% link _posts/2018-01-03-ruby-logic-interpreter-2.md %})
* [Interlude — minitest tests]({% link _posts/2018-01-04-ruby-logic-interpreter-3.md %})
* {:.bg-[var(--tw-prose-bullets)]}[Part 3 — handling variables]({% link _posts/2019-01-26-ruby-logic-interpreter-4.md %})

- - -
